A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE 3RD BATTALION 1ST PUNJAB REGIMENT




                                    A
                              BRIEF HISTORY
                           OF THE 3RD BATTALION
                           1ST PUNJAB REGIMENT

                                _formerly_

                              76th Punjabis
                           16th Madras Infantry
                  16th Regiment, Madras Native Infantry
                2nd Battalion, 5th Madras Native Infantry
                          16th Madras Battalion
               16th Carnatic Battalion, or Lane’s Battalion

                                PRINTED BY
                          GALE & POLDEN LIMITED
                       WELLINGTON WORKS, ALDERSHOT
                                   1927




DEDICATION.


                     THIS HISTORY IS DEDICATED TO THE
                          MEMORY OF OUR COMRADES
                           OF ALL RANKS OF THE
                              76TH PUNJABIS
                      WHO WERE KILLED OR DIED DURING
                              THE GREAT WAR




FOREWORD


This brief history has been compiled and published to commemorate the
150th Anniversary of the Raising of the 16th Carnatic Battalion and its
continuous service from 1776 to this date.

_December 10th, 1926._




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

    CHAPTER  I. “SHOLINGHUR”—“CARNATIC”                                  1

       ”    II. “MYSORE”—“SERINGAPATAM”                                  8

       ”   III. “AVA”                                                   11

       ”    IV. “BURMA”—76TH PUNJABIS                                   14

       ”     V. THE GREAT WAR:
                  EGYPT—SHAIBA—KHAFAJIYEH—EUPHRATES—NASIRIYEH—FIRST
                    BATTLE OF KUT                                       17

       ”    VI. CTESIPHON AND THE RETIREMENT TO KUT                     25

       ”   VII. KUT                                                     31

       ”  VIII. END OF THE GREAT WAR—THIRD AFGHAN WAR                   38

       ”    IX. PALESTINE—3RD BATTALION 1ST PUNJAB REGIMENT—WAZIRISTAN  42

    APPENDIX I. DECORATIONS AWARDED TO OFFICERS AND MEN: (1) PRIOR
                  TO THE GREAT WAR; (2) DURING THE GREAT WAR            49

       ”    II. MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES                                 52

       ”   III. THE THIRD AFGHAN WAR: DECORATIONS AND MENTIONS          54

       ”    IV. BRITISH OFFICERS KILLED AND WOUNDED                     55

       ”     V. GREAT WAR CASUALTIES                                    56

       ”    VI. LIST OF COMMANDANTS, 1903-1926                          56




A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE THIRD BATTALION, FIRST PUNJAB REGIMENT




CHAPTER I

“SHOLINGHUR,” “CARNATIC”


[Sidenote: December 10th, 1776: Formation.]

Owing to a threatened invasion of the Carnatic by the Mahrattas, the
growing power of Hyder Ali of Mysore, and war with the French, it was
considered necessary to increase the troops of the Madras Government.
The native portion of the army then consisted of eight battalions, and
eight more were raised, the present 3rd Battalion 1st Punjab Regiment
being formed by drafts from the other battalions and designated the 16th
Carnatic Battalion or “Lane’s” Battalion. Captain Thomas Lane was the
first Commandant, and Ensign James Richardson the first Adjutant.

[Sidenote: 1778.]

The Battalion remained at Trichinopoly, where it was raised, until 1778,
when it joined the main army under Sir Hector Munro for the reduction
of the French Settlement of Pondicherry. This place was invested on
August 8th and capitulated on October 17th. The Battalion’s casualties
were:—Killed—1 sergeant, 1 naik, 19 sepoys. Wounded—1 lieutenant, 5
havildars, 2 naiks, 1 drummer, 26 sepoys. A total of 56.

The 16th was one of the battalions left to garrison the town and to
assist in dismantling the defences.

[Sidenote: 1780: Defence of Permacoil Fort.]

In September, 1780, Hyder Ali, the Sultan of Mysore, invaded the Carnatic
in alliance with the French. The Battalion, less one company under
Lieutenant Bishop at Permacoil Fort, joined the main army which marched
to Conjeeveram, with the object of joining hands with a detachment under
Colonel Baillie, which was marching from Guntoor.

[Sidenote: Defeat of Colonel Baillie’s Detachment.]

This detachment was attacked by Hyder Ali within eight miles of the main
army. Sir Hector Munro sent a force, consisting of the flank companies
of the army, to rescue Colonel Baillie, but the entire detachment was
either killed or taken prisoner to Seringapatam. The army, thus reduced,
was forced to retire to Madras, with the loss of baggage, being harassed
the whole way by the Mysore Cavalry. Sir Hector Munro was relieved of
his command for not having supported Colonel Baillie with his whole army
instead of with a detachment only. Sir Eyre Coote took over command and
formed the army into three divisions, the Battalion being placed in the
2nd (or Left) Division under Colonel Lord MacLeod.

[Sidenote: 1781: “Carnatic”.]

Arrangements having been made for the supply of the army, it marched from
The Mount on January 17th, strength 7,450 (including 1,600 Europeans) and
62 guns.

[Sidenote: Relief of Permacoil.]

The first object was the relief of various forts besieged by Hyder Ali,
among them Permacoil, held by one company of the 16th. This was effected.
Lieutenant Bishop was noted for immediate promotion for the gallant
manner in which he had carried out the defence, but this was disallowed
by the Directors of the Company as contrary to the established custom.

[Sidenote: Battle of Cuddalore.]

After several skirmishes, Hyder Ali made a general attack on the British
while they were in camp near Cuddalore. This was repulsed, the 16th
Battalion being cited in orders as having behaved especially well.

[Sidenote: Battle of Porto Novo.]

The Army continued its march southwards, and found the united armies of
Hyder Ali and the French, under Lally, in position near Porto Novo on
July 1st. The enemy numbered 60,000 regulars with 47 guns and 120,000
irregulars. Coote attacked the enemy’s left flank, which was broken, and
caused the general defeat of the enemy. The 16th was in the second line
under General Stuart, which covered the left of the attack and finally
repulsed the cavalry under Lally, which made a desperate final attempt to
break the British line.

The casualties were:—Killed: European, 19; Native, 64. Wounded: European,
38; Native, 198. Missing: European, 1; Native, 18. Total, 338.

The Battalion’s losses were:—Killed: 1 European drummer and 3 rank and
file. Wounded: Ensign John Haynes, 2 subadars, 2 havildars, and 20 rank
and file. Missing: 1. Total, 30.

Coote especially praised the steadiness and spirited behaviour of the
Sepoy Corps.

The victory could not be followed up owing to lack of cavalry and
supplies, but it broke the spell and terror of Hyder’s name.

The army now moved north to effect a junction with the Bengal detachment,
which was marching down the coast. This having been accomplished,
the whole force returned to St. Thomas’ Mount on August 8th, and was
reorganized into five brigades. The 16th was placed in the 2nd Brigade,
Colonel Ross Lang, Right Wing, under Sir Hector Munro.

On August 16th the whole army marched, and having taken Tripasore,
continued its westerly advance.

[Sidenote: Battle of Pollilore.]

The whole strength of the enemy was found in position at Pollilore, on
the same ground on which Baillie’s detachment had been destroyed the
previous year. The effective British strength was 11,000 and that of
Hyder Ali and the French 150,000 (regulars and irregulars), with 80 guns.
Coote attacked and penetrated the enemy’s centre with his right wing,
while his left outflanked the enemy’s right. A general retreat of the
enemy then commenced.

The British casualties were:—Killed: Europeans, 24; Native, 105. Wounded:
European, 54; Native, 207. Missing: Native, 63. Total, 453.

Again the lack of cavalry, supplies, and transport prevented the victory
being exploited, and the army fell back on Tripasore on August 29th.

[Sidenote: Battle of Sholinghur.]

The Fort at Vellore, which was besieged by the enemy, being in urgent
need of relief, Coote with great difficulty collected sufficient
transport and rations to march with this object on September 21st.

Hyder Ali was holding a pass through the Sholinghur Hills on the direct
road with his whole army. The British army arrived at the pass on
September 27th, and at once attacked. Hyder Ali did not realize that the
British were seriously attacking. The 2nd Brigade and the Cavalry were
sent to turn the enemy’s left flank while the rest of the army attacked
frontally. The attack was entirely successful and the enemy fled in
disorder after the defeat of the Mysore Cavalry. The strengths of the
opposing armies were: British, 11,500; Mysore, 150,000, and 70 guns. The
British casualties were only 20 killed, 58 wounded and 9 missing.

Owing to the continual dissensions between the civil and military
authorities, an efficient supply and transport service was impossible.
Government also would not sanction the raising of cavalry. So for the
third time in this year decisive victory was missed. Coote declared that
he would rather have had five days’ rice than the trophies and credit of
the victory.

In 1889 the battle honour “Sholinghur” was sanctioned for the Battalion
in commemoration of its services in this battle.

[Sidenote: Relief of Vellore.]

Vellore having been relieved on November 3rd, the army returned to
Madras, where it arrived on December 3rd.

[Sidenote: Defence of Tripasore.]

Tripasore, the main base of the army, was attacked by Hyder, but held
out until relieved, the garrison being under the command of Lieutenant
Bishop, of the Battalion.

[Sidenote: 1782: Relief of Vellore.]

Early in January it again became necessary to relieve Vellore, to effect
which the army marched on the 2nd, and, after some fighting, the place
was relieved on the 11th. Hyder intercepted the return march, but on two
occasions refused battle.

[Sidenote: Surrender of Permacoil.]

In May the Fort of Permacoil, held by a company of the Battalion under
Lieutenant Plaw, was forced to surrender.

[Sidenote: Relief of Wandewash and Battle of Arnee.]

Owing to the continued lack of transport the army was practically
immobile, and Hyder Ali laid siege to Wandewash and other forts. To
draw him off Coote marched towards Arnee, Hyder’s principal depot. This
had the desired effect and the British were overtaken on June 2nd,
about three miles from Arnee. The rear guard held the enemy until the
army was formed up, when the whole line advanced and drove the enemy
back. The advance had to be stopped for a time owing to an attack by
11,000 cavalry on the baggage, which was covered by the 2nd Brigade.
This being repulsed, the advance continued until the exhaustion of the
infantry called a halt. There being no cavalry, the pursuit could not be
continued. The army later fell back on Madras.

Owing to ill-health, Sir Eyre Coote handed over command to
Brigadier-General Stuart in September, and returned to Bengal.

[Sidenote: 1783.]

Reinforcements of British troops having arrived from England, the army
was reformed in January, the 16th being placed in the 3rd Brigade, 1st
Line. Hyder Ali died in this year and was succeeded by his son, Tippoo.

[Sidenote: Attack on Cuddalore.]

The army marched south on February 4th and came up with the united forces
of Tippoo and the French near Neddingol. The enemy refused battle, and
the army marched to the relief of Vellore. This effected, it moved in a
leisurely way to Cuddalore, where it arrived on June 7th. Coote, who had
returned to command, died on April 27th, to the grief and consternation
of the army, especially of the native portion.

Cuddalore was attacked, but, owing to the faulty timing of the three
columns, the attacks were not simultaneous and were brought to a
standstill. The British lost—Europeans: Killed, 165; wounded, 428.
Natives: Killed, 60; wounded, 292; of which the Battalion sustained 6
killed and 36 wounded. The force on either side is supposed to have been
11,000.

The situation was critical, especially as the fleet had been so badly
damaged by the French, under Suffren, that it was forced to retire on
Madras. Fortunately, at this juncture, news was received that peace had
been declared on July 2nd.

General Stuart was relieved of the command, and was succeeded by Colonel
Ross Lang.

[Sidenote: Capture of Palghatcherry and Coimbatore.]

The Battalion now formed part of a force which was sent south and
captured Palghatcherry and Coimbatore. It was then to advance on
Seringapatam from the South.

[Sidenote: 1784.]

Everything was ready, but the orders were countermanded owing to a truce
with Tippoo. The army dispersed, but had no sooner done so than it was
ordered to reassemble owing to Tippoo having refused to sign. This had
the desired effect, but it was not till March 11th, 1784, that peace
was finally declared. In this year the designation of the Battalion was
changed to the 16th Madras Battalion.

For services during the campaigns of 1780-84 the battle honour “Carnatic”
was granted to the Battalion in 1889.




CHAPTER II

“MYSORE,” “SERINGAPATAM”


[Sidenote: 1789.]

[Sidenote: 1790: “Mysore.”]

[Sidenote: Battle of Cheyur.]

[Sidenote: Surrender of Erode.]

The Battalion was employed on ordinary garrison duty until 1789, when it
joined a force operating against some insurgent zamindars in Southern
India. At the end of the year, owing to an expected outbreak of war with
Tippoo, it formed part of the army assembling at Wallajabad with the
intention of entering Mysore from the south. Coimbatore and other places
in this district were occupied, the Battalion being with the 1st Native
Brigade, which took the Fort of Suttiamungalum, which it garrisoned. On
September 11th Tippoo suddenly descended the Guzzlehutty Pass with 40,000
men. Information of this move had been received, but was disbelieved at
headquarters, and the detachment was ordered to hold on. After holding
off the attack of Tippoo, it was decided to retire at daybreak on the
14th, but the detachment was overtaken and a battle ensued at Cheyur, in
which the Brigade lost 148 Europeans and 408 natives killed and wounded.
Six guns and all the baggage were lost, but the enemy was checked. Erode,
which was held by a company of the Battalion under a subadar, was forced
to surrender on September 25th.

Tippoo, hearing of a concentration at Vellore, marched north unobserved,
and was not followed by the army until November 8th. The Battalion
with the 1st Europeans, 14th and 20th Battalions, was left to hold the
Coimbatore District with headquarters at Palghatcherry.

[Sidenote: Siege and Surrender of Coimbatore.]

The enemy sent a force which besieged Coimbatore in June. The siege was
raised by a force consisting of the Battalion and some local levies, and
a company was left to strengthen the garrison. In October the enemy again
attacked Coimbatore and an attempt to relieve the place having failed, it
surrendered after a defence of a month.

[Sidenote: 1792.]

In December orders were received to clear the district. This was done,
and by March, 1792, the force had, with great difficulty, reached the
head of the Guzzlehutty Pass, but was ordered to retire as peace had been
made.

The battle honour “Mysore” was granted to the Battalion in 1889, for
services during the campaigns of 1790-92.

[Sidenote: 1793.]

War was declared against France in 1793, and volunteers from the
Battalion formed part of the 2nd Volunteer Battalion for the expedition
against Mauritius, but this was abandoned.

[Sidenote: 1795.]

In 1795 war was declared against Holland, and one company embarked as
part of a volunteer battalion which proceed to Malacca.

[Sidenote: 1796.]

In 1796 the Madras Army was reorganized, the Battalion becoming the 2nd
Battalion of the 5th Regiment of Madras Native Infantry.

[Sidenote: 1797.]

The Battalion embarked in 1797 for an expedition against Manilla, but was
recalled from Penang owing to instructions from England to abandon the
expedition.

[Sidenote: 1798.]

[Sidenote: 1799: Capture of Seringapatam.]

Tippoo became restless and in 1798 an army was ordered to concentrate
at Vellore under General Harris. The Battalion was in the 6th Brigade,
Left Wing. The army advanced in February, 1799, and after some minor
actions encamped two miles south-west of Seringapatam on April 5th. After
much fighting against the enemy’s advanced posts, which were gradually
captured, the breaching batteries were established by May 2nd. By May 4th
a practicable breach had been made, and the assault was ordered for one
o’clock that afternoon. The Battalion was on duty in the trenches on that
day, the assaulting troops being formed of the flank companies of the
battalions off duty. The troops in the trenches formed the “sustaining”
corps. The assault was entirely successful after severe fighting. Tippoo
himself was killed. The casualties were:—Europeans: Killed, 181; wounded,
622. Natives: Killed, 119; wounded, 420; missing, 100; of which total the
Battalion sustained 11 killed and 33 wounded.

The battle honour of “Seringapatam” was subsequently granted to the
Battalion for this campaign.




CHAPTER III

“AVA”


[Sidenote: 1800.]

During the next few years the Battalion was employed in settling the
country and subduing refractory chiefs, and so did not take part in the
Mahratta War under Sir Arthur Wellesley.

In 1824 its designation was changed to the 16th Regiment of Madras Native
Infantry.

[Sidenote: 1824.]

Until March, 1824, the Battalion was on ordinary garrison duty in various
parts of Mysore and the Nizam’s dominions, when it embarked for service
in Burma and joined the force assembling at Chittagong for the conquest
of the province of Arracan.

[Sidenote: 1825: “Ava.”]

[Sidenote: Battle of Arracan.]

The force marched in February, 1825, and after great hardships arrived in
front of the principal Burmese outpost at Mahattee. A detachment of the
Battalion was employed on board the flotilla accompanying the force and
was present at the repulse at Chanballa. The main force took the advanced
Burmese positions on March 26th and 27th and halted upon the enemy’s
main position covering the town of Arracan on the 28th. On the 29th the
assault was carried out by the light companies of the 54th Foot, 10th and
16th Madras Native Infantry, supported by six companies of the Battalion
under Captain French. The assault went forward in spite of the steepness
of the ascent, and the well-directed fire of the enemy. The leading men
got their hands on the trench, but were unable to maintain their position
owing to the incessant shower of large stones. Nevertheless, the attack
was maintained until Captain French had been killed and every other
officer wounded, when the troops were recalled. The force had lost 28
killed and 114 wounded, of which the Regiment had Captain French and 10
other ranks killed and Lieutenants Luard, White, and Gledstanes and 31
other ranks wounded.

Batteries were constructed, and at 11.30 p.m. on the 30th an assault was
carried out, which was entirely successful, and the city was occupied the
next day.

A force consisting of the light companies of the 44th and 54th Foot and
of the 16th Madras Native Infantry, and four companies of the 1st Bengal
Light Infantry Battalion, marched in May, 1825, to endeavour to find a
route across to the Irrawaddi River, by which the force at Arracan could
join hands with the main army from Rangoon. After terrible hardships they
were forced to return, nearly every man being sick. The unhealthiness
of the country may be judged by the fact that on October 1st, 1825, the
Battalion only had 108 men fit for duty and 644 sick. Between June 16th,
1824, and January 31st, 1826, the Battalion lost by death 7 officers, 5
native officers, and 148 other ranks and 15 followers. Some Battalions
did not have a single man available for duty.

The expedition had been successful in the conquest of the province of
Arracan, but failed in its principal object, that of penetrating to the
valley of the Irrawaddy.

The troops were withdrawn later, the Battalion landing in Madras in
January, 1826, and proceeding to Vellore.

The battle honour “Ava” was granted for services in this campaign.

[Sidenote: 1830.]

In 1830 the 16th was one of the Battalions selected to have a rifle
company, on the disbandment of the Madras Rifle Corps.

[Sidenote: 1839: Capture of Kurnool.]

[Sidenote: 1843.]

[Sidenote: 1844: Operations in the Sawunt Warree.]

From 1826 to 1839 the Battalion was employed in the ordinary routine of
garrison duty in various parts of the Madras Presidency and Hyderabad
State. In the latter year it formed part of the force under Major-General
Wilson for the reduction of the fort and petty sovereignty of Kurnool.
This having been effected, the Battalion was left to garrison the
fortress until 1843, when it was ordered to Belgaum in the Southern
Mahratta country, to replace the Bombay troops employed in the conquest
of Scinde. While stationed there, the Rifle Company greatly distinguished
itself in the Light Field Force under Major-General Delamotte, employed
in suppressing the insurgents in the Sawunt Warree country, and took part
in the capture of several forts.

[Sidenote: 1845.]

[Sidenote: Action of Sasseedroog.]

Privates Cotapah and Veerapah were awarded the Third Class of the Order
of Merit, which had just been instituted, for distinguished conduct at
the unsuccessful attack on the stockade in the Pass of Sasseedroog. The
former was also presented with a gold medal by the City of Perth for
protecting and bringing off the body of Lieutenant Campbell of the Bombay
European Light Infantry. Private Hyder Ally Khan was also admitted to
the Third Class Indian Order of Merit for distinguished gallantry, while
Lieutenant Francis Mardale received the thanks of the Commander-in-Chief
and Government of Bombay.

[Sidenote: 1855.]

The Battalion was on garrison duty in various parts of the Bombay
Presidency and Southern India until 1853, when it proceeded to Aden,
returning to India in 1855.




CHAPTER IV

1857: “BURMA”—76th PUNJABIS


[Sidenote: 1857: The Mutiny.]

[Sidenote: Battle of Azimghur.]

On the outbreak of the Mutiny of the Bengal Army in 1857, the Battalion
volunteered for service against the mutineers and was thanked by the
Government. The Rifle Company under Lieutenants Bates and Gray formed
part of the Madras Rifles, commanded by Major Carr, of the 16th. The
Company took part in several actions, notably that at Azimghur on April
6th, 1858, up to the end of the Mutiny. The Company rejoined Battalion
headquarters at Hurryhur in April, 1860.

Seven non-commissioned officers and privates were admitted to the Third
Class of the Indian Order of Merit for distinguished conduct at Azimghur.

[Sidenote: 1858: Operations in North Canara.]

[Sidenote: 1859.]

In 1858, while the Regiment was stationed at Mangalore, a detachment of
it formed part of a force under Captain Walpole, of the 16th, for the
suppression of an insurrection in North Canara. After ten months of very
harassing duty, the rebellion was put down and the detachment rejoined
the Battalion at Hurryhur in January, 1859.

[Sidenote: 1865.]

In 1865, while stationed at Madras, the reorganization of the army took
place consequent on the transfer to the Crown of the forces of the East
India Company.

[Sidenote: 1868.]

The Battalion proceeded to Burma in 1866 and returned to India in 1868.

Up to 1886 the Battalion was employed on garrison duty in various parts
of the Madras Presidency and of the Central Provinces.

[Sidenote: 1886: Burma]

In July, 1886, the Battalion, which was then at Vizianagram, was ordered
to embark for active service in Burma, and crossed the frontier on August
1st. The 16th formed part of the 3rd Brigade, Upper Burma Field Force,
under Brigadier-General Anderson, and was employed in various parts of
Upper Burma, chiefly on detachment, and took part in much desultory
fighting.

During the campaign the following casualties were incurred: 1 British
officer killed and 1 wounded, 5 other ranks killed and 3 wounded. In
1887, 61 non-commissioned officers and men died of disease; total deaths
from this cause on service were 102.

The battle honour of “Burma, 1885-87” was granted for this campaign.

[Sidenote: 1888.]

In February, 1888, the Battalion went into garrison at Mandalay until
March, 1889, when it returned to India and was stationed at Secunderabad.

[Sidenote: 1895.]

[Sidenote: 1900.]

[Sidenote: 1903.]

The Battalion again proceeded to Burma in 1895, being stationed at
Rangoon until December, 1898, when it returned to India and was stationed
at Berhampore. There it remained until January, 1900, when it embarked
for Singapore, in relief of British troops who had been sent to South
Africa. Returning to India in November, 1901, the Battalion was stationed
at Madras until May 16th, 1903, when it was transferred to Secunderabad
to be reconstituted as a Punjab regiment with the designation “76th
Punjabis.” Thus, after an honourable existence of more than 130 years,
the Battalion ceased to exist as a purely Madras Battalion.

The Colours, mess plate, and band instruments were handed over to the new
Battalion, and Lieut.-Colonel J. Jackson, of the old 16th, was appointed
Commandant. Drafts of about two hundred non-commissioned officers and
men were received from various Punjab Battalions and the new Battalion
recruited up to full strength, the majority of the British officers being
those of the 16th Madras Infantry.

The new composition of the Battalion was:—

    Two companies of Sikhs.
    Two companies of Hindu Jats.
    Four companies of Punjabi Mussalmans.

The uniform remained scarlet, but the facings were changed to emerald
green from yellow.

In this year sanction was accorded for General Officers, who had been
previously connected with Battalions of the Indian Army, being appointed
Honorary Colonels thereof. Accordingly Major-General Henry S. Elton, who
had formerly served for thirty-two years in the 16th Madras Infantry, was
appointed the first Honorary Colonel.

[Sidenote: 1904.]

By the end of 1904, the Battalion was reported fit for service.

[Sidenote: 1908.]

In March, 1908, the Battalion proceeded to Tientsin, North China, for
garrison duty, finding detachments at Chinwangtao and Shanhaikwan. It
returned to India in 1911 and was stationed at Jhelum.




CHAPTER V

THE GREAT WAR

Egypt—Shaiba—Khafajiyeh—Euphrates—Nasariyeh—First Battle of Kut


[Sidenote: 1914.]

Orders were received to mobilize, as for service in Europe, on October
21st, and the Battalion mobilized to full strength plus ten per cent.
in seventy-two hours. A draft of 120 men of the 87th Punjabis, under
Captain S. M. H. Baillie, was sent to the Battalion in place of its own
reservists, who could not be called up in time. A depot was left in
Jhelum under Captain E. Milford.

The Battalion embarked at Karachi on October 31st as part of the 30th
Indian Infantry Brigade, under Major-General C. J. Melliss, V.C., which
comprised the 24th Punjabis, 126th Baluchistan Infantry, and 2/7th Gurkha
Rifles. The Brigade disembarked at Suez and took over the defence of the
Little Bitter Lake-Suez Section of the Suez Canal, on which the Battalion
found various posts with Headquarters at Suez. On the Turks threatening
attack the whole Battalion took up position on the canal banks. Beyond
one or two very small actions and one reconnaissance by two companies
into the desert, no fighting took place in this sector.

[Sidenote: 1915.]

On March 13th the 28th Brigade relieved the 30th, which concentrated at
Suez for embarkation. The Brigade sailed from Suez on March 22nd, and
great disappointment was felt that it was sailing southwards instead of
northwards to France, as had been expected.

On April 7th the Battalion arrived at Basra and went into camp at Makina,
where the Brigade was concentrating as part of the newly-formed 12th
Division.

On April 12th the Brigade attempted to reinforce the garrison of Shaiba
by wading through mud and water across the inundated country between
Zobeir Gate and Old Basra but, owing to the farther bank being strongly
held by the enemy, was ordered to retire when half-way across. Several
attempts to cross by bellum were made, but priority had to be given to
urgently required ammunition and rations, so the Battalion remained in
bivouac at Zobeir Gate. Detachments were provided to protect the bellum
convoys and drive off hostile craft.

After Shaiba the Battalion returned to Makina Camp and a few days later
embarked for Ahwaz, and joined the concentration of the 12th Division,
under Major-General Gorringe, at Sabeh on April 28th.

After very hot and waterless marches, the Division arrived at Illah on
the Karkheh river on May 7th. The Turks were found to have retired, but
it was necessary to punish the Beni Turuf tribe of Arabs. The river was
found to be about 300 yards broad and the bridging material insufficient,
so a flying bridge and canvas boats were improvised and, thanks greatly
to the exertions of many swimmers of the 66th and 76th, all men, stores
and animals were eventually landed on the far bank.

[Sidenote: Khafajiyeh.]

On May 13th a column, of which the Battalion formed part, marched by
night to the cover of some hills facing the Karkheh river, on the far
bank of which was the principal Beni Turuf village of Khafajiyeh. The
morning of the 14th was spent waiting for the advance of the 12th Brigade
up the left bank, which did not arrive owing to the bad ground it had to
move over. At 2 p.m. the 76th and 2/7th Gurkha Rifles advanced towards
the river bank, coming under fire from the village and its fort. The
river was found to be 280 yards broad and very swift and, as there was
no means of crossing it, a retirement was ordered at 6 p.m., which was
closely followed up by the Arabs. Bivouac was formed about half a mile
from the river. The Battalion had had 11 men wounded during the afternoon.

On the 15th the 2/7th Gurkha Rifles and the 76th again advanced to the
river and, on volunteers being called for to swim the river, a party did
so, led by Subadar-Major Ajab Khan, under heavy fire from the fort and
opposite bank, supported by the covering fire of the Battalion.

This party succeeded in emptying the only serviceable boat to be found
on the other bank, under the close fire of the fort, and swam it across.
Major Perrin’s double-company then proceeded to ferry across in this
boat, and the first party, under Subadar-Major Ajab Khan and Jemadar
Mehdi Khan, stormed the gate of the fort and forced their way in,
driving the enemy into the buildings or out of the fort, where they were
shot by another party that had arrived, under the command of Subadar
Indar Singh, and had meanwhile surrounded the fort. Eventually all the
enemy were smoked out of the buildings and killed or captured. Two
double-companies bivouacked in the fort and the rest of the 76th and the
2/7th Gurkha Rifles bivouacked on the right bank. For their gallantry on
this occasion, six Indian Orders of Merit and twenty Indian Distinguished
Service Medals were awarded to the Indian officers and men who took part.

One sepoy was killed, 1 Indian officer, and 11 sepoys wounded during the
day.

The next morning the village was burnt, and two days later the Battalion
started on the return march to Illah and Ahwaz, whence it proceeded by
steamer to Basra.

[Sidenote: Second Action of Kurna.]

On the 28th May, the Machine Gun Section and fifty rifles embarked on a
river steamer, under Captain Laing, and took part in the second action
of Kurna, returning to Basra after the capture of Amarah, in charge of
prisoners.

The Battalion proceeded to Kurna by steamer on June 10th to take part
in the 12th Division’s advance up the Euphrates for the capture of
Nasariyeh. During the stay in Kurna the heat was intense. The whole
brigade was trained daily in boat drill and formations in case this form
of warfare should be necessary.

Owing to the insanitary conditions in the Basra bivouac and the heat and
mosquitoes in the marshy ground at Kurna, 270 men went down with fever
before the Regiment left.

On the 26th the expedition started up the Euphrates in steamers, and
crossed the Hammar Lake, where it was held up by the obstruction of the
entrance to the Hakika channel. This was eventually blown up by the
Sappers and Miners, assisted by swimmers from the Battalion, and the
steamers were hauled across by working parties amounting to as many as
600 at a time.

Reconnaissances were made up the Gurma Safah Channel, and the Turkish
positions located holding the junction of the Gurma Safah and Euphrates.
The country was under water except for a narrow strip on either bank.

On July 4th a short advance was made by the Battalion to a point known as
Ati’s House, whence a further reconnaissance was made and outposts pushed
forward under the fire of snipers.

The attack was ordered for the 5th, as follows:—The 76th to advance up
the left bank, supported by the 24th Punjabis and 30th Mountain Battery
in boats in the marsh on its right; 2/7th Gurkha Rifles and 1/4th
Hampshire Regiment to advance up the right bank.

[Sidenote: Gurma Safah (Sukh-es-Sheyuk).]

The advance began at 4 a.m. through thick palm groves and undergrowth,
and at once met with opposition which was driven back, until the 2/7th on
the other bank were held up by a broad creek, which could not be crossed.
The 76th continued their advance now enfiladed by the enemy on the other
bank as well as being strongly opposed to their front, until they were
held up by the enemy in position behind a strong wall extending from the
river to the marsh. Here Lieut.-Colonel Smithett was severely wounded,
and Captain Baillie and Lieutenant Graves were also wounded. In addition
to other casualties, the whole Machine Gun Section was killed or wounded
and the guns damaged.

The 24th now moved up and outflanked the enemy through the marsh, causing
him to retire, pursued by half the 76th and the remainder of the 24th,
until he reached his final position across the Euphrates, where he
surrendered. The remaining four companies of the Battalion were employed
in keeping down the fire from the right bank during the pursuit. The
casualties of the 76th amounted to 2 Indian officers (Jemadars Nur Khan
and Maluka), and 14 men killed, 3 British and 2 Indian officers and 37
men wounded, being about twenty per cent. of the strength engaged, about
150 men having been left in charge of the Battalion’s boats, which did
not come into action.

On the 6th the force proceeded up river and formed camp at Asani, about
three miles below the Turkish main position covering Nasariyeh. From here
reconnaissances were made and outposts pushed forward, and continual
sniping took place on both sides. The heat was intense, and all ranks
were exposed day and night to the elements and every sort of mosquito and
biting insect, there being no tents or cover of any kind by day or night.

On the night of July 13th-14th an attack was ordered to establish a
forward position on the right bank. Accordingly Major Rybot’s double
company, supported by a company of the 48th Pioneers, attacked and rushed
Shakair, killing most of the garrison and occupying the village. At the
same time the remainder of the Battalion occupied a grove called “Sixteen
Palms” without opposition, except for snipers, on the right bank, and
the 48th Pioneers entrenched the position. Our losses at Shakair were
2nd-Lieutenant Hathorn, Indian Army Reserve of Officers, and 1 sepoy
killed, 7 men wounded.

Throughout the 14th the enemy retaliated with gun and rifle fire, but
the forward positions were maintained. Subadar Neki Ram was wounded at
Shakair during the morning. Till the 23rd preparations were continued for
the assault, enemy sniping being continuous.

[Sidenote: Nasariyeh.]

The orders for the attack on July 24th were as follows:—The 12th
Brigade to assault the enemy position on the left bank after an intense
bombardment, supported by part of the 18th Brigade. On the position
being taken they were to swing round and enfilade the enemy’s position
on the right bank behind the Medijinah Creek, which would then be
assaulted by the 30th Brigade, supported by one battalion of the 18th
Brigade, and covered by the artillery. The 30th Brigade was to assault
as follows:—1/4th Hampshire Regiment (only 150 strong) and 2/7th Gurkhas
would advance from the “Sixteen Palms”—Shakair line, covered by the fire
of the 24th Punjabis and massed machine guns. The 76th, in support, to
advance simultaneously a thousand yards in rear of the Hampshire Regiment
and 2/7th Gurkhas.

At 5.30 a.m., on the 24th, the artillery bombardment began on the left
bank and continued for three-quarters of an hour, when the 12th Brigade
assaulted, and, after severe hand-to-hand fighting, carried the position.
At 7 a.m. the 30th Brigade began their advance under shell- and heavy
rifle-fire from the enemy trenches. The ground being absolutely devoid of
cover, casualties were heavy. A barge had meanwhile been jammed across
the mouth of the Medijinah Creek. This barge carried parties of Sappers
and Miners and Pioneers with bridging material and reserve ammunition.
Work was started on two foot bridges over the creek within 200 yards
of the enemy trenches. The artillery bombardment continued until the
Hampshire Regiment and Gurkhas and 76th had worked their way up to the
bank of the creek. The water was found to be only waist deep, the flow
having been stopped by the barge. At about 10 a.m. a charge was initiated
and the enemy’s position entered. After some hand-to-hand fighting, the
whole of the position was in our hands, the enemy streaming across the
plain, pursued by our fire. The supporting battalion of the 18th Brigade
now passed through and took up the pursuit, while the 30th Brigade
reformed and followed closely after it. The enemy did not stand in his
second position, and was driven out of a third position on the bank
of the river in the evening. The 30th Brigade bivouacked on his third
position.

The Turks left in our hands 17 guns, numerous rifles, quantities of
ammunition and stores. The enemy losses were 700 killed, 740 wounded,
and 200 wounded prisoners. The Battalion lost Lieutenants Darell and
McElwaine, and Subadar-Major Ajab Khan wounded, 6 rank and file killed,
and 55 wounded out of about 300 engaged, the 30th Brigade losing 200 out
of a strength of 900. The total British casualties were 564.

Nasariyeh was occupied on the 25th without further opposition. During
these operations from June 26th to July 25th the Battalion had
lost:—British officers: 1 killed, 5 wounded. Indian officers: 2 killed,
4 wounded. Rank and file: 21 killed and 123 wounded. Sick: approximately
70. The following decorations were subsequently awarded:—Distinguished
Service Order, 1; Military Cross, 1; Indian Order of Merit, 7; Indian
Distinguished Service Medal, 19.

The month of August was spent in bivouac at Nasariyeh resting, only a few
outposts being found by the Battalion.

At the end of the month, the 30th Brigade, less the 1/4th Hampshire
Regiment, was moved by water to Amarah to join the 6th Division in their
advance up the Tigris.

Reinforcements were received at Amarah, and Lieut.-Colonel Smithett
rejoined and took command.

[Sidenote: First Battle of Kut.]

The 2/7th Gurkha Rifles and 76th then proceeded, partly by steamer
and partly by march, to join the concentration of the 6th Division at
Sannaiyat. The camp was shelled by the enemy on September 25th, and
our force advanced and occupied Chahela Mounds on the 26th with little
opposition. The 2/7th and 76th were detailed to guard the left flank and
shipping during the coming battle, and entrenched themselves in redoubts
on the right bank. On the 28th the First Battle of Kut took place. The
Turks were beaten back and the 6th Division occupied Kut-al-Amarah.

The Battalion was left to guard the hospitals and a few days later
marched to Kut.

During the month spent in Kut, drafts were received from the Depot,
and a company of Jats from the 99th Infantry, under Major Cotton, with
2nd-Lieutenants Spowart and Rogers, Indian Army Reserve Officers, brought
the Battalion up to full strength again.




CHAPTER VI

CTESIPHON AND THE RETIREMENT TO KUT


On November 8th the Battalion marched with a column and joined the 6th
Division at El Kutunie on the 15th.

[Sidenote: Battle of Ctesiphon.]

The advance on Baghdad commenced on the 19th, by a move against the
Turkish positions at Zeur, but, after an exhausting day, the enemy was
found to have retired. The main body continued its march to Lajj the next
day, but the 2/7th and 76th were detailed to escort the shipping round
the thickly-wooded Baghailah bend, and did not arrive at Lajj till the
21st. The same evening the whole force moved out to attack the enemy in
his position at Ctesiphon. The plan for the attack was as follows:—(_a_)
One brigade, supported by the heavy artillery and ships, to attack, with
its left on the river, the enemy position from “High Wall” to “Water
Redoubt.” (_b_) One and a half brigades to attack “V.P. Redoubt” (the
left of the enemy’s first line) from the east. (_c_) One brigade to
attack “V.P.” from the north-east, these being supported by the Royal
Field Artillery Brigade and the Howitzer Battery. (_d_) A flying column,
consisting of the Cavalry Brigade, two armoured cars, Machine Gun Battery
and the 76th Punjabis, to attack the left rear of the enemy, and on his
retreating to pursue him to Baghdad.

The Turkish first line was about six miles in length, consisting of
redoubts heavily wired and connected by fire trenches. His second line,
two to three miles in rear, was not so thoroughly entrenched. The enemy
numbered 18,000 and 40 guns, the British 13,000 and 32 land guns.

The night advance commenced at 7 p.m. on the 21st, Column “A” moving
direct on its objective. “B,” “C,” and the Flying Columns followed
the old Nahrwan Canal, each column halting on arrival at its allotted
position.

The Flying Column reached its position at 3 a.m. During the march the
Battalion formed the advance guard. Army transport carts, sufficient for
half the men to ride in, were provided, mainly in order to facilitate a
swift pursuit on the enemy retreating.

At daybreak, the guns with Column “A” could be heard away to the
south-west. A few enemy camel patrols were rounded up by our cavalry and
armoured cars. Columns “B” and “C” soon after advanced, and took “V.P.”
after fierce fighting. At 8.15 the Flying Column advanced, cavalry on the
right, 76th on the left, supported by the Machine Gun Battery and “S”
Battery, Royal Horse Artillery.

To quote the official “History of the War in Mesopotamia”:—

“After advancing about 1,200 yards, the 76th came under heavy fire from
enemy infantry in their front, and a hot fight ensued. The 76th, behaving
with great gallantry, gained some ground, but the hostile force opposing
them—evidently part of the 51st Division—was too strong, and about 10
a.m. the further advance of the 76th was definitely checked and they dug
themselves in. They had suffered heavy casualties, including the loss of
their two senior British officers.”

The cavalry now withdrew to ward off an Arab attack on the transport
and rear of Columns “B” and “C.” The Battalion had by this time lost
severely and any attempt to advance was at once stopped by enemy rifle
and machine-gun fire. Meantime, many gallant actions were performed by
various men, in bringing up ammunition and distributing it and bringing
the wounded into the shelter of the shallow entrenchment that had been
made. During this time severe fighting was taking place in the enemy
second line. At about 4 p.m. the enemy counter-attacked with two fresh
divisions, whose presence was, up to that time, unknown, and Columns “B”
and “C” were finally ejected from the enemy’s second position.

The right of the Battalion was now attacked by about two battalions and
the flank thrown back to meet the attack; the enemy advanced to within
four or five hundred yards, where he was stopped. As darkness fell
piquets were pushed forward and to the right flank, and the Battalion
commenced to concentrate and dig itself in. The enemy showed no signs
of movement. At 7 p.m. orders were received to rejoin the Brigade at
“V.P.,” and this was done, very slowly and with great difficulty owing to
the very large number of wounded, who had to be carried. On arrival at
“V.P.” the Battalion bivouacked on the enemy’s first line trenches, and
the night passed quietly. The following extract from the official history
serves to show that the efforts made by all ranks on this memorable day
were not without considerable effect:—“According to the Turkish account,
the five infantry battalions of the 51st Division here had now all been
absorbed into the firing line, which covered a front of about four miles.
That they could make no further progress seems to have been due mainly
to the stout fighting qualities of the 76th and the fine work of “S”
Battery.”

[Sidenote: November 23rd.]

The next day the Battalion was employed collecting wounded, ammunition
and equipment between the enemy’s first and second lines, and in keeping
off marauding Arabs. By 3 p.m. it was evident that the enemy was
advancing from the direction of Ctesiphon Arch. The Battalion was on
its way back to High Wall for a much-needed rest, when it was urgently
recalled to reinforce the troops holding “V.P.” It came under artillery
and rifle fire on the way, and eventually took up a position in a
converted Turkish communication trench, which it held all night. The
Turks appeared to have lost their direction, as large bodies were moving
about in the vicinity all night, but no serious attack took place, any
visible movement by them being at once stopped by our fire. A patrol,
under Havildar Neki, carried out a daring reconnaissance during the night
and brought in valuable information.

[Sidenote: November 24th.]

Bitter cold was experienced all night, officers and men being dressed in
shirts and shorts only. “V.P.” was held all the 24th under fire from guns
and snipers, while the wounded were evacuated to the rear. About 4 p.m.
the 24th Punjabis and 2/7th Gurkhas sent up all their water mules to the
Battalion, which was highly appreciated as the men had had no food or
water, except what they carried, since the night of the 21st. The final
retirement to High Wall was covered by the 76th and the 76th Battery, and
was completed by 6.30 p.m.

The losses of the Battalion during the three days were very heavy,
viz.:—Killed: Major C. L. Perrin, 2nd-Lieutenant Gosney, Indian Army
Reserve of Officers, Subadar Abdullah Khan, Jemadars Saida Khan and Umrao
Singh (99th), and 42 rank and file. Wounded: Lieut.-Colonel A. C. H.
Smithett, 2nd-Lieutenant Spowart, Indian Army Reserve of Officers (99th),
Subadars Sohan, Mehdi Khan, and Chuni Ram (99th), Jemadars Sher Singh and
Jalal Khan, and 225 rank and file. Missing, 5; died of wounds, 3; wounded
and missing, 2.

Lieut.-Colonel Smithett, the Commandant, died of his wounds on the 25th,
to the great regret of all ranks.

[Sidenote: The Retirement to Kut.]

During the 25th the wounded were evacuated to Lajj, one double-company
piqueting the road. In the afternoon dense columns of the enemy were
seen to be advancing, and the force retired under cover of darkness to
Lajj, where it halted till the 27th. On the 27th at 4 p.m. the arduous
retirement commenced, Aziziyeh (22 miles) being reached at 8.30 a.m.,
28th, the left half battalion there covering the bridgehead. On the 30th
the 30th Brigade with the 16th Cavalry and Howitzer Battery was ordered
to move rapidly on Kut, where the shipping was being held up by the
enemy, and marched at 8 a.m. At 4 p.m. after covering twenty miles, camp
was formed for the night.

[Sidenote: Umm-al-Tubul.]

At 6.30 a.m. the Brigade was ordered to march as fast as possible back
to the Division’s camp at Umm-al-Tubul, which was being attacked, in
order to render it assistance. On arrival the Battalion came under
shrapnel fire, and, on the division retiring, it took over the duties of
rear guard and marched till 5 p.m., halted for half an hour, and then
continued the retirement to Monkey Village, which was reached at 12.30
a.m. on the 2nd, having covered thirty miles. The march was resumed
at 5 a.m., only interfered with by Arab snipers, and bivouac within
three miles of Kut was reached at 8 p.m., all ranks being exhausted,
having marched seventy miles since 8 a.m. 30th, and been on the move
for forty-eight hours without food. The cold was bitter and no food or
blankets could be obtained till nearly midnight.

During the retirement one man was killed, one wounded, and one missing.
The strength of the Battalion on arrival in Kut, under the command of
Major Cotton (99th Infantry, attached), was—Officers: British, 8; Indian,
13; rank and file, 320.

Of this retirement, the Official History relates:—“For over twelve days
General Townshend’s force—largely composed of young soldiers—had been
fighting, marching or working continuously, frequently without sufficient
food or water and often deprived of sleep. This forty-four miles’ march
(General Melliss’ Column did fifty-one miles) coming, under pressure from
the enemy, at the end of this period and carried out in thirty-six hours,
was therefore, a severe test of discipline. Their soldierly execution of
it must arouse our admiration and add greatly to the reputation they had
already won.”

The following decorations were subsequently awarded for these
operations:—Distinguished Service Order, 1; Indian Order of Merit, 1;
Indian Distinguished Service Medal, 2.

Many very deserving rewards could not be granted owing to the loss of the
recommendations during the siege.




CHAPTER VII

KUT


[Sidenote: The Siege of Kut.]

On the 3rd the force moved into Kut-al-Amarah. Some sick and lightly
wounded men rejoined, bringing the strength up to about 333. The 30th
Brigade was detailed as reserve brigade and was allotted camping space in
gardens on the edge of the town.

Work was at once commenced on the defences and pushed on with the
greatest vigour possible. The Battalion was employed night and day
digging the second line and communication trenches to the front line.

On December 5th the enemy began to close round Kut and opened with
artillery fire and a few snipers. The Cavalry Brigade and greater portion
of land transport crossed the river on their way to Ali Gharbi on the
6th, on which day the last steamer also left, and Kut was isolated. Work
was continued on the defences to the limit of the men’s endurance. The
enemy strength increased daily and he gradually closed in on the front
line. Intense artillery bombardment was kept up for about two hours
morning and evening when the mirage disappeared and enabled observation
of fire to be made. On the 9th the enemy attacked the bridgehead on the
right bank and captured it. Under cover of fire from the left bank it was
temporarily reoccupied, but again captured by the Turks. After dark the
bridge was cut adrift, the right bank having been occupied in force by
the enemy.

The Turkish artillery fire had become so severe by the 10th that orders
were issued to discontinue working in the open in daylight.

The usual routine for the reserve brigade was to move out at dusk,
work till 1 a.m., when the units went into close reserve and support
to the front line till dawn. They then returned to bivouac dug-outs
on the outskirts of the town. After food, work was again commenced on
communications, improving roads, second line trenches, etc. Return to
bivouac for the evening meal preparatory to moving out again at dusk.
Piquets along the river bank, to prevent entry or egress of enemy agents,
were also found in turn by night and day by the reserve brigade.

On the afternoon of the 12th the Turks made a determined attack on the
north-west sector and succeeded in establishing themselves within a
hundred yards of the front-line trenches, although they failed to enter
them. The same night the 76th moved up in relief to the front line. This
relief of the 16th Brigade by the 30th Brigade, and vice versa, took
place weekly after this date.

The front line taken over was only of an average of two and a half feet
deep, with no sanitary arrangements, many dead being just thrown on the
parapet or parados, and no direct communication trenches. The enemy
was extremely active, pushing up his saps and opening new parallels.
At night he was particularly active, making many attempts on the wire.
These were all driven off by rifle and machine-gun fire and by bombs,
while his working parties were harassed by fire whenever possible. Our
men were kept employed to the utmost limit of their strength improving
the trenches, etc. During this first tour of duty in the front line the
Battalion lost severely, 2nd-Lieutenant Muirhead being mortally wounded,
Jemadar Ram Sarup killed, Subadar Sundar Singh wounded, and about fifty
men killed and wounded.

Throughout the siege casualties were of daily occurrence, there being no
place within the defences which was not under rifle fire. The majority of
the enemy artillery fire was directed at our artillery positions near
the brick kilns, and on the town itself. The front line received very
little artillery fire, and it was generally less strenuous in the front
line than in reserve, the latter entailing constant working parties day
and night, as well as having to be in close support on completion of the
night’s work. The men only had the clothes in which they stood up and two
blankets, and consequently soon became lousy, as there was practically
no opportunity of washing, all water having to be drawn from the river,
which was some distance away and subject to heavy sniping. On December
24th the enemy made a determined attack on the fort, which he entered,
and was only ejected after severe hand-to-hand fighting at 3 a.m. on the
25th. That evening the 76th, which was due for relief, received orders
to move into the fort during the night, where it took over the north and
west faces and repaired and improved the defences. It was again relieved
on the 28th and had twenty-fours’ much-needed rest.

[Sidenote: January, 1916.]

Rain commenced falling on January 6th and added much to the difficulty
of keeping the trenches and communications in good order, and to the
discomfort of the men. News of the relieving force was now received daily
and gave all ranks a feeling of optimism as to the early raising of the
siege. On January 21st the river overflowed into the enemy trenches,
which in turn overflowed into ours, and no amount of work could stop it.
A retirement was therefore ordered to the Middle Line, which had been
prepared for occupation in such an eventuality, but was already two or
three feet deep in mud and water. Ammunition, stores and kits were moved
with great difficulty owing to the depth of mud and water in the front
line and communication trenches, which was almost up to the men’s necks.
One havildar was drowned trying to rescue ammunition. The cold was also
extreme and the men, having no means of drying their clothes, suffered
heavily from exposure, 3 British officers and 50 men having to report
sick. The enemy to our front had been forced by the water to retire 1,500
yards and valuable firewood was retrieved from his trenches by parties
from the Battalion, after inflicting many casualties on him as he retired
across the open.

On the 29th horsemeat was first issued and all rations were much reduced.

[Sidenote: February.]

On February 16th a bund twenty feet thick was commenced all along the
trenches in order to keep out the floods that were expected in March, and
work on this continued nightly until it was finished.

Enemy aeroplanes also put in frequent appearances, but in only one case
did their bombs cause any damage. Several schemes for sorties were
prepared and the Battalion actually paraded for some, but they did not
eventually take place. Great difficulty was met with in getting the men
to eat horsemeat and they did not do so until very near the end of the
siege; they did, however, find many kinds of edible weeds and grass to
cook and supplement the scanty ration. The casualties in Kut up to the
end of February totalled 3,000.

[Sidenote: March.]

On March 8th and 9th the Battalion, with others, was held in readiness
to cross the river, and co-operate with the relief force, and great was
the disappointment when its failure was made known. On the 10th rations
were reduced to 10 ounces of barley and 4 ounces for parching, and all
surplus animals were killed. On the 15th the enemy was again flooded out
of his trenches. For some time past the whole British garrison had been
employed daily in making bricks and collecting materials, and nightly in
completing the flood bund. The flood arrived on the 16th and continued
rising until on the 27th Kut was an island. On the 28th rations were
reduced to 8 ounces, and the same day a new problem appeared in the
percolation of water through the ground into the trenches from the flood
outside. This gave serious anxiety and much hard work to counteract,
nearly to the end of the siege. The men now began to become very weak
and emaciated, but retained their spirits, in which all were much helped
by the constant and distinctly heard bombardments of the enemy trenches
by the relieving force, whose flashes and bursts could be easily seen at
night.

Casualties of the 76th from the commencement of the siege to the end of
March:—Officers: British—Died of wounds, 1; wounded, 2. Indian—Killed, 1;
wounded, 4. Rank and File—Killed, 32; died of wounds, 17; wounded, 90;
missing, 2; died of disease, 16. Followers—Killed, 2; died of wounds, 1;
wounded, 3; total, 171.

[Sidenote: April.]

On April 9th rations were reduced to 7 ounces, on the 10th to 5 ounces,
and on the 11th to 4 ounces, when the men at last overcame their
prejudices and commenced eating horsemeat. Our aeroplanes were now
dropping supplies daily, but were unable to carry sufficient to feed the
garrison. On the 24th the gallant attempt of the _Julnur_ was made to
run up river with supplies, and great was the disappointment to see her
ashore at Magasis the next morning. Surrender now appeared inevitable,
the reserve ration had been eaten and men were actually dying of
starvation. Sentries could no longer stand at their posts, but sat down,
and for about three weeks the Battalions in the trenches had not been
relieved as the men were too weak to move their equipment, bedding and
stores. It was indeed a pitiful sight to see the men weak and emaciated,
but one was proud that the men of the Battalion kept up their morale and
did their utmost to carry out any order given.

Owing to weakness everyone lay flat on his back whenever possible in
order to conserve his strength, and the line-sick were practically unable
to move.

On April 28th and 29th the last emergency ration was consumed, and on the
29th the garrison surrendered after a defence of 150 days. Thus ended
the siege of Kut, which had lasted for five months, a period of hardship
and discomfort seldom equalled in the history of the British Army. The
spirit, power of endurance and courage of the men of the Battalion in
the face of never-ending digging and repairing of trenches, long hours
of night duty, exposure to wet and bitter cold and starvation, is a
wonderful proof of their soldierly qualities and a fine example to those
who will follow them in the Battalion. The fact that the siege had ended
in capitulation was no fault of theirs and, by holding on to Kut, they
had prevented the Turkish Army from overrunning Lower Mesopotamia. The
Battalion proceeded by steamer to the Turkish Camp at Shumran, where
it bivouacked on the bank of the river. The men were in the last stage
of exhaustion and more than fifty per cent. were suffering from an
acute form of diarrhœa. Very little food was obtained in this camp, and
almost entirely consisted of hard Turkish emergency biscuits. Many men
of the garrison died of starvation or enteritis. Twenty-three men of
the Battalion were passed as unfit to march by the Turkish doctors. The
rest marched off for Baghdad on the 6th with the remainder of the Indian
garrison; the story of their hardships and suffering has been related
elsewhere. The following went into captivity and remained prisoners, with
the exception of a few who escaped, for two and a half years:—

    Major N. V. L. Rybot, D.S.O.
    Captain E. Milford.
    Captain S. van B. Laing, M.C.
    Captain & Adjutant G. V. R. Reyne.
    2nd-Lieutenant O. G. Kiernander, I.A.R.O.
    2nd-Lieutenant G. N. Rogers, I.A.R.O.
    Captain F. T. Drake-Brockman, 7th Lancers, att.
    Captain P. B. Bharucha, D.S.O., I.M.S. (was subsequently exchanged).

And about 240 Indian officers, non-commissioned officers and men.

Although the Battalion had only been actively engaged since April 12th,
1915, and had had several short periods of rest, the casualties from
enemy action and sickness (mostly fever), during the seven months to
November 5th, 1915, had necessitated the provision and absorption of
drafts totalling 1,600 men or nearly twice the original strength of the
Battalion.

For services during the siege two Distinguished Service Orders and nine
Indian Distinguished Service Medals were subsequently awarded to officers
and men of the Regiment.




CHAPTER VIII

END OF THE GREAT WAR—THIRD AFGHAN WAR


During the siege large drafts for the Battalion had collected with the
relieving force, including Lieut.-Colonel Rodney-Anderson, who had been
appointed Commandant, Lieutenants R. D. E. Darell, E. J. D. McElwaine, A.
H. Dobbs, T. M. Graves, 2nd-Lieutenants Lechler and Mahoney, Indian Army
Reserve of Officers. The first-named died in hospital, and Lieutenants
Dobbs and Graves were killed in action with the relieving force. The
men were all attached to the 82nd Punjabis (now 5th Battalion 1st
Punjab Regiment) and the 92nd Punjabis throughout the operations of the
relieving force.

On January 1st, 1917, the Depot of the Battalion received orders to
expand to a battalion and reform the 76th, the drafts in Mesopotamia
being returned to assist in the making up of numbers. Lieut.-Colonel W.
L. Malcolm, from the 31st Punjabis, was appointed to command in March,
and the Regiment moved to Chaman for garrison duty there. In November a
nucleus was sent to join the new 2nd Battalion of the Regiment which was
being raised at Nasirabad. This Battalion eventually did good service on
the frontier in 1919-20 in the Waziristan and Mahsud Campaigns, being
mentioned in despatches. Several officers of the 76th served in it and
it was demobilized in September, 1922, some of the officers and men
rejoining the 1st Battalion.

Lieut.-Colonel L. A. Watson, from the 74th Punjabis, took over command
on February 1st, 1918, and in the same month the Battalion moved to Dera
Ismail Khan and thence to Tank, leaving a depot at the former place. In
June Major J. F. Woodham returned from service and took command.

The Regiment remained at Dera Ismail Khan and Tank, from time to time
holding the outposts.

While at Tank two-thirds of the Regiment were at one time in hospital
with Spanish influenza, of which sixty-four died. In December, 1918,
and January, 1919, the released Kut prisoners of war rejoined and were
at once sent off to their homes on furlough. The numbers that rejoined
were 8 Indian officers, 183 non-commissioned officers and men, and 17
followers.

The following battle honours were granted to the Regiment for the Great
War:—

    “Suez Canal,”
    “Egypt, 1915,”
    “Shaiba,”
    “Kut-al-Amarah, 1915,”
    “Ctesiphon,”
    “Defence of Kut-al-Amarah,”
    “Mesopotamia, 1915-18,”

and the undermentioned decorations were granted to officers and men of
the 76th:—

    Commander of the Order of the British Empire    1
    Distinguished Service Order                     5
    Order of the British Empire                     2
    Military Cross                                  1
    Order of British India, 1st Class               1
    Order of British India, 2nd Class               5
    Indian Order of Merit, 2nd Class               14
    Indian Distinguished Service Medal             53
    Foreign Orders                                  4
    Meritorious Service Medal                       9
    Mentions in Despatches                        101

and four Indian officers were given Honorary King’s Commissions.

On war being declared on Afghanistan the Battalion was in Dera Ismail
Khan with a company at Jandola, three platoons in other outposts, and
one at Tank. A large draft was received from the 87th Punjabis. Various
detachments were sent out to reinforce threatened points from time to
time.

[Sidenote: Siege of Jandola.]

During May, as many of the Waziristan Militia deserted and the tribesmen
had risen, it became imperative to evacuate many of the posts held by the
Militia, and the result was that the company under Captain Anderson and
Lieutenant Proctor in Jandola became isolated and surrounded by large
numbers of hostile tribesmen.

Owing to the forethought and energy of the commander, the reserve water
tanks in the fort had been filled, providing water for twelve days, and
there were twenty-six days’ rations available. The water supply was cut
off by the tribesmen on May 28th, on which day the siege of Jandola
commenced.

On the 29th the enemy opened fire on the main fort and pushed in an
attack on a detached tower held by a party under Havildar Bari Sher,
by whom he was driven off. That night the fort was attacked, as also
was the detached tower, no less than three times, but all attacks were
repulsed. Communication was interrupted the next day except by means
of friendly Bhittanis. Heavy attacks were again made during the night
May 31st/June 1st. The men now suffered greatly from thirst, as water
was strictly rationed to two water-bottles a day, and the heat was very
great. Many attempts were made to obtain water, but the enemy had all
sources of supply accurately covered by fire. Bhisti Gurditt Singh, with
great gallantry and although wounded, several times succeeded in bringing
in water under fire, for which he was later awarded the Indian Order of
Merit.

Continual sniping took place day and night, and several further attacks
took place, but were in each case driven off with loss. On June 9th the
Movable Column arrived and raised the siege, and the garrison were
relieved and rejoined the Battalion. The casualties were:—Indian other
ranks, 1 died of wounds and 1 wounded, and 1 follower wounded.

Captain Anderson was awarded the Military Cross for the able manner in
which he had defended the post. Two Indian Orders of Merit and two Indian
Distinguished Service Medals were awarded to men of the Regiment, and
seven officers and men were mentioned in despatches for services in the
Afghan Campaign.

The complete Battalion concentrated in Tank in July, and remained there
till the end of August, finding escorts for convoys, and dealing with
raiders. In September it moved to Khirgi, where a month was spent working
on defences and roads, attempting to round up Mahsud raiders, and day
piqueting. Several men died of cholera.

By October 3rd the Battalion had concentrated at Darya Khan. The men left
for their homes on furlough preparatory to proceeding to Palestine, and
headquarters was despatched by rail to Dhond.

For its services on the frontier the Battalion was granted the battle
honour “Afghanistan, 1919,” and General Service Medal, India, 1908,
with clasps, “Afghanistan, North-West Frontier, 1919,” and “Waziristan,
1919-21.”




CHAPTER IX

PALESTINE—3RD BN. 1ST PUNJAB REGIMENT—WAZIRISTAN


[Sidenote: 1920.]

The Battalion sailed for Egypt at the end of February under the command
of Major S. van B. Laing, D.S.O., M.C., and arrived at Sarafend in
Palestine on March 24th, 1920, where it joined the 9th Brigade of the 3rd
Lahore Division.

The Depot was left at Dhond, but subsequently moved to Kirkee, Bellary,
and Jhelum before rejoining the Battalion at Lucknow in 1922.

On April 28th, 1920, the Battalion proceeded to Haifa, whence, owing
to constant raiding by Arabs from across the Jordan, it despatched
detachments to various places for their protection. A company was also
sent to Cairo to be trained as a Mounted Camel Company.

A party of Mussalmans was also enabled to perform the pilgrimage to Mecca.

[Sidenote: 1921.]

On July 27th the Battalion proceeded to Jerusalem, whence about half the
strength proceeded on detachment to various towns. The Battalion arrived
at Beni Suef in Egypt in December, and took part in manœuvres near Cairo
in March. In April the Camel Company, which had been employed on patrol
work between Beersheba and the Dead Sea, rejoined, and in May the whole
Battalion arrived in Alexandria and provided detachments in and around
that city. The salutary sea air quickly dispelled the many cases of
malaria which were a legacy from the Jordan Valley.

[Sidenote: 1922.]

In December, 1921, the Commandant, Lieut.-Colonel E. Milford, D.S.O.,
rejoined from leave, and the Battalion proceeded to Kantara to await
orders to embark for India. Owing, however, to serious disturbances in
Cairo, the Battalion was hurriedly despatched thither on Christmas Eve,
and remained there till March 23rd. It then moved to Suez and embarked
for India, arriving at Lucknow on April 7th, where it was joined by the
Depot.

[Sidenote: 3/1st Punjab Regiment.]

In accordance with the Reorganization Scheme, the Jat Company was now
replaced by Rajputs from Rajputana, and on December 1st the Battalion
became the 3rd Battalion of the 1st Punjab Regiment, the other battalions
being:—

     1st  62nd Punjabis.
     2nd  66th Punjabis.
     4th  1st Brahmans.
     5th  82nd Punjabis.
    10th  84th Punjabis, who became the Training Battalion for the
            Group or Regiment.

The badges of the Elephant subscribed “Assaye,” and the Golden Dragon
wearing an Imperial Crown, worn by certain of the battalions, were taken
into use by all battalions of the new Regiment. The uniform remained
scarlet, but the facings were changed to grass-green.

[Sidenote: 1923.]

The following officers were posted permanently to the Battalion on
reorganization:—

    Lieut.-Colonel E. Milford, D.S.O.
    Major A. F. Harper.
    Major S. van B. Laing, D.S.O., M.C.
    Major T. B. Minniken, rejoined from 2/76th.
    Major G. van R. Reyne, D.S.O., M.V.O., rejoined from 2/76th.
    Major G. F. Turner, M.C., from 82nd.
    Captain E. J. D. McElwaine, O.B.E.
    Captain C. C. J. Kellie, from 1st Brahmans.[*]
    Captain A. G. Lester-Garland, M.C.
    Captain S. F. Irwin.[*]
    Captain W. A. Whitehead.
    Captain J. B. Dalison, from 2/76th.
    Captain H. T. Davison, from 2/76th.[*]
    Captain M. J. Murray, from 2/76th.[*]
    Captain C. G. Sallai, from 2/76th.
    Lieutenant E. J. Austen.[*]
    Lieutenant H. W. Murphy.
    Lieutenant A. W. Lowther.
    Lieutenant G. E. Attwell.

    [*] Seconded.

During the hot weather the Battalion was honoured by being selected to
provide the Simla detachment to find the guards on the Residences of His
Excellency the Viceroy, and His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, under
the command of Major S. van B. Laing, D.S.O., M.C.

[Sidenote: 1924.]

On November 21st the Battalion left Lucknow and proceeded to Waziristan,
arriving at Razani on November 30th. Here it remained for six months,
being employed in finding permanent piquets and road protection parties.
It then proceeded to join the 7th Brigade at Razmak, and on arrival
marched with the Movable Column to Sarwekai and back. This demonstration
march occupied fourteen days and a certain amount of sniping was
experienced, Subadar Surat Singh and ten other ranks being wounded.

In August the Battalion proceeded to Tauda China for a month, where it
provided protection and also working parties in connection with the
completion of the circular road. Two men were wounded during this period.

In November the Battalion moved with a column to Piaza Raghza, where it
remained for six months performing protective duties in connection with
the improvement of the road and convoys, and providing about one company
in permanent picquets.

During the Battalion’s tour of duty in Waziristan, 2 men were killed, 1
Indian officer and 13 men wounded, by enemy action.

[Sidenote: 1925.]

In December, 1925, the Battalion, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel A.
F. Harper, moved to Nowshera in the North-West Frontier Province, where
it formed part of the 4th Brigade.

[Sidenote: 1926.]

Thus, in the 150th year of its existence, the Battalion is serving in
Nowshera. Its services in Waziristan have been rewarded by the grant of
the General Service Medal, India, with a clasp for “Waziristan, 1921-24,”
and it has also been honoured by again being selected to find the
detachment at Simla during the hot months.




APPENDICES




APPENDIX I

DECORATIONS AWARDED TO OFFICERS AND MEN.


1. PRIOR TO THE GREAT WAR.

         RANK AND NAME.                        REMARKS.

    Subadar-Major Sheik Ibram   Pensioned March 17th, 1826, for zealous,
                                  active and meritorious service with the
                                  5th Brigade of the Madras Troops on
                                  Foreign Service in Arracan, on full pay
                                  and staff allowance of Subadar-Major.
                                  Presented with a Sword and Palankeen
                                  and usual allowance (Rupees 70) for its
                                  support. After decease a pension of half
                                  the pay of a Subadar-Major to be granted
                                  to his nearest heir for the support of
                                  his family.

_The Indian Order of Merit, 3rd Class._

    626 Private Cotapah                      Sasseedroog, 1844.
    1135 Private Veerapah                    Sasseedroog, 1844.
    773 Private Hyder Ally Khan              Panalghur, 1844.
    113 Havildar Moodoo Kistuah            }
    288 L./Naik Mohammed Ghalil            }
    270 Private Syed Imarm                 }
    185 Drill-Havildar Shaik Abdood Cawder } Azimghur, 1858.
    338 L./Naik Mohammed Kassim            }
    293 Private Mohammed Ally              }
    273 Private Jyanah                     }


2. DURING THE GREAT WAR.

_Commander of the British Empire._

    Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Dewing (retired).

_Distinguished Service Order._

    Major N. V. L. Rybot.
    Captain P. B. Bharucha, I.M.S.
    Captain G. v. R. Reyne.
    Major E. Milford.
    Major S. van B. Laing.

_Order of the British Empire._

    Captain E. J. D. MacElwaine.
    Honorary Captain Ajab Khan.

_Military Cross._

    Captain S. van B. Laing.

_Order of British India, 1st Class._

    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan.

_Order of British India, 2nd Class._

    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan.
    Subadar-Major Hussain Shah.
    Subadar Indar Singh.
    Subadar Sundar Singh.
    Subadar Bahadur Shah.

_Indian Order of Merit, 2nd Class._

    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan.
    894 Havildar Kesar Singh.
    1029 Naik Karam Dad.
    1549 Sepoy Shiv Ram.
    Subadar Mehdi Khan.
    1009 Sepoy Burhan Ali.
    880 Naik Ram Singh.
    1326 Sepoy Jalam.
    398 Sepoy Bagga Khan.
    533 L./Naik Hukam Singh.
    536 Naik Sundar Singh.
    313 Havildar Ganda Singh.
    Subadar-Major Hussain Shah.
    773 L./Naik Battan Singh.

_The Indian Distinguished Service Medal._

    709 L./Naik Chajja Singh.
    1815 Sepoy Karim Dad.
    198 Bugler Gul Sher.
    172 L./Naik Lal Khan.
    991 L./Naik Ban Sher.
    1588 Sepoy Badan.
    259 Havildar Said Zaman.
    1302 Havildar Hamidullah.
    1231 L./Naik Nawais Ali.
    999 Sepoy Afsar Khan.
    996 Sepoy Bostan Khan.
    762 Havildar Hukam Dad.
    733 Havildar Allah Dad.
    510 L./Naik Chajja Singh.
    1546 Sepoy Dharam Singh.
    1365 Sepoy Thakur Singh.
    883 L./Naik Zaman Khan.
    1218 Naik Feroze Khan.
    1053 Sepoy Sattar Mohommed.
    573 L./Naik Badlu.
    274 Sepoy Ranjit.
    280 Sepoy Mathura.
    1638 Sepoy Gobardhan.
    1791 Sepoy Harphul.
    1610 Sepoy Bela Singh.
    589 Sepoy Bakar Khan.
    1761 Sepoy Sajawal Khan.
    1495 Sepoy Sher Dil.
    688 Sepoy Feroze Khan.
    1499 Sepoy Mah Wali.
    1866 Sepoy Nadir Ali.
    915 Sepoy Ganga Sahai.
    Subadar Bahadur Shah.
    Subadar Hussain Shah.
    Jemadar Ram Sarup.
    Jemadar Gulzara Singh.
    529 Sepoy Ishar Singh.
    1301 Ward Orderly Ralla Singh.
    Sub-Assistant Surgeon Barkatullah (Indian Subordinate Medical
      Department).
    73 Havildar Gul Sher.
    1941 Sepoy Ram Nath.
    Subadar Ghulam Mohommed.
    773 L./Naik Battan Singh.
    414 Havildar Narain Singh.
    693 Havildar Kalandar Khan.
    1033 Havildar Feroze Khan.
    304 Havildar Bhola Singh.
    675 Havildar Mangi Sher.
    533 Havildar Hukam Singh.
    881 Havildar Jamna Das.
    710 Havildar Beant Singh.
    793 Havildar Shan Khan.

_Bar to the Indian Distinguished Service Medal._

    573 Havildar Badlu.

_Foreign Orders._

         RANK AND NAME.              NAME OF ORDER.

    Subadar Bahadur Shah           French Croix de Guerre.
    Subadar Ghulam Mohammed        French Croix de Guerre.
    Honorary Captain Ajab Khan     Hedjaz Order.
    943 Havildar Nand Singh        Serbian Order of Karageorgewich.

_Granted Honorary King’s Commissions._

         RANK AND NAME.              RANK GRANTED.

    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan        Captain.
    Subadar-Major Hussain Shah     Lieutenant.
    Subadar-Major Ahmad Khan       Lieutenant.
    Subadar-Major Indar Singh      Lieutenant.

_The Meritorious Service Medal._

    932 Sepoy Abdul Rehman.
    942 Havildar Fazal Dad.
    999 Naik Afsar Khan.
    2068 Naik Bahadur Khan.
    881 Colour-Havildar Jamna Das.
    1645 Havildar-Major Rafiullah.
    1127 Havildar Des Raj.
    1384 Naik Hari Ram.
    3694 Sepoy Gur Narain.




APPENDIX II.

MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES.


KHAFAJIYAH, 1915.

    Lieut.-Colonel A. C. H. Smithett.
    Major C. L. Perrin.
    Lieutenant R. D. E. Darell.
    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan.
    Jemadar Mehdi Khan.
    894 Havildar Kesar Singh.
    709 L./Naik Chajja Singh.
    1029 L./Naik Karam Dad.
    1815 L./Naik Karim Khan.
    198 Bugler Gul Sher.
    172 L./Naik Lai Khan.
    991 L./Naik Ban Sher.
    999 Sepoy Afsar Khan.
    996 Sepoy Bostan Khan.
    1271 L./Naik Nawais Ali.
    1549 Sepoy Shiv Ram.
    1588 Sepoy Badan.
    1638 Sepoy Gobardhan.
    1927 Sepoy Harphul.
    1302 Naik Hamidullah.
    259 Havildar Said Zaman.
    589 Naik Bakar Khan.
    1610 Sepoy Bela Singh.
    536 Naik Sundar Singh.
    1009 Sepoy Burhan Ali.
    1761 Sepoy Sajawal Khan.
    1495 Sepoy Sher Dil.
    688 Sepoy Feroze Khan.
    1499 Sepoy Mah Wali.
    1866 Sepoy Nadir Ali.

EUPHRATES, 1915.

    Lieut.-Colonel A. C. H. Smithett.
    Major C. L. Perrin.
    Major N. V. L. Rybot.
    Captain S. van B. Laing.
    Captain G. van R. Reyne.
    Lieutenant R. D. E. Darell.
    Lieutenant E. J. D. McElwaine.
    2/Lieutenant R. W. Gosney.
    2/Lieutenant N. McD. Hathorn.
    Subadar-Major Ajab Khan.
    Subadar Bahadur Shah.
    Subadar Hussain Shah.
    Jemadar Gulzara Singh.
    Jemadar Mehdi Khan.
    Jemadar Ram Sarup.
    880 Naik Ram Singh.
    1326 Sepoy Jalam.
    398 Sepoy Bagga Khan.
    Captain P. B. Bharucha (Indian Medical Service).
    762 Havildar Hukam Dad.
    883 L./Naik Zaman Khan.
    733 Havildar Allah Dad.
    1218 Naik Feroze Khan.
    1053 Sepoy Sattar Mohommed.
    673 Sepoy Faiz Talab.
    394 Sepoy Jabra Khan.
    533 L./Naik Hukam Singh.
    323 Colour-Havildar Harnam Singh.
    512 L./Naik Hukam Singh.
    514 Sepoy Basant Singh.
    915 L./Naik Ganga Sahai.
    313 Havildar Ganda Singh.
    636 Naik Sundar Singh.
    510 L./Naik Chajja Singh.
    1546 Sepoy Dharm Singh.
    1365 Sepoy Thakur Singh.
    529 Sepoy Ishar Singh.
    1530 Sepoy Mir Zaman.
    1494 Sepoy Karam Khan.
    1268 Sepoy Kala Khan.
    1151 Sepoy Kewal.
    1988 Sepoy Attar Singh.
    1561 Sepoy Kallu Khan.
    573 L./Naik Badlu.
    274 Sepoy Ranjit.
    280 L./Naik Mathura.
    Sub-Assistant Surgeon Barkatullah (Indian Subordinate Medical
      Department).
    1301 Ward Orderly Ralla Singh.

CTESIPHON, 1915.

    Lieut.-Colonel A. C. H. Smithett.
    Major C. L. Perrin.
    Captain G. van R. Reyne.
    2/Lieutenant W. Muirhead.
    Subadar-Major Hussain Shah.
    741 Havildar Neki Ram.
    1304 Sepoy Gurdiyal.
    857 Sepoy Kure.
    1941 Sepoy Ram Nath.
    73 Havildar Gul Sher.
    687 Havildar Bostan Khan.
    284 Havildar Nandu Ram.

SIEGE OF KUT-AL-AMARAH.

    Major H. J. Cotton (99th).
    Major N. V. L. Rybot.
    Captain S. van B. Laing.
    Captain G. van R. Reyne.
    Major E. Milford.
    Subadar Ghulam Mohammed.
    414 Havildar Narain Singh.
    693 Havildar Kalandar Khan.
    1033 Havildar Feroze Khan.

SMYRNA, 1918.

    Major N. V. L. Rybot.

1919.

    Captain G. van R. Reyne (twice).




APPENDIX III.

THE THIRD AFGHAN WAR: DECORATIONS AND MENTIONS.


SIEGE OF JANDOLA.

         RANK AND NAME.              DECORATIONS AND MENTIONS.

    Captain R. C. Anderson         Military Cross.
    991 Havildar Bari Sher         Indian Order of Merit, 2nd Class.
    Bhisti Gurdit Singh            Indian Order of Merit, 2nd Class.

OPERATIONS AGAINST AFGHANISTAN.

         RANK AND NAME.              DECORATIONS AND MENTIONS.

    74 Havildar Karam Khan         Indian Distinguished Service Medal.
    2550 L./Naik Kartar Singh      Indian Distinguished Service Medal.
    Lieutenant P. Proctor          Mentioned in Despatches.
    Captain A. Culley              Mentioned in Despatches.
    991 Havildar Bari Sher         Mentioned in Despatches.
    Jemadar Mohommed Rasul         Mentioned in Despatches.
    74 Havildar Karam Khan         Mentioned in Despatches.
    2550 L./Naik Kartar Singh      Mentioned in Despatches.
    Bhisti Gurdit Singh            Mentioned in Despatches.




APPENDIX IV.

BRITISH OFFICERS KILLED AND WOUNDED.


       RANK AND NAME.                        REMARKS.

  Ensign John Haynes                  Wounded, Battle of Porto Novo, 1781.

  Captain Andrew French               Killed on March 29th, 1825, at the
                                        attack on the Heights of Arracan.

  Lieutenant J. K. Luard              Wounded on March 29th, 1825, at the
                                        attack on the Heights of Arracan.

  Lieutenant F. B. White              Wounded on March 29th, 1825, at the
                                        attack on the Heights of Arracan.

  Lieutenant R. S. Gledstanes         Wounded on March 29th, 1825, at the
                                        attack on the Heights of Arracan.

  Lieutenant F. C. Rynd (20th         Wounded near Ningyan (Pyminanah)
    Madras Infantry), attached          North Burma, on August 15th, 1886,
    10th Madras Infantry.               when on duty with escort for
                                        coolies cutting roads.

  Lieutenant J. F. Greenwood          Killed on November 21st, 1886, when
                                        in command of advance guard on the
                                        road between Ningyan (Pyminanah),
                                        North Burma, and Yemethen.

  2/Lieutenant N. G. Hathorn          Killed at Nasiriyeh, Euphrates, 14th
                                        July, 1915, taking the village of
                                        Shakhair.

  Lieut.-Colonel A. C. H. Smithett    Wounded, Action in the Gurma Safeh,
                                        July 5th, 1915; killed, Battle of
                                        Ctesiphon, November 22nd, 1915.

  Major C. L. Perrin                  Killed, Battle of Ctesiphon, November
                                        22nd, 1915.

  2/Lieutenant R. W. Gosney           Killed, Battle of Ctesiphon, November
                                        22nd, 1915.

  2/Lieut. G. W. Muirhead             Killed, Siege of Kut-al-Amarah,
                                        December 12th, 1915.

  Lieutenant T. M. Graves             Wounded, Action on the Gurma Safeh,
                                        July 5th, 1915; killed with Relief
                                        Force, Kut-al-Amarah.

  Lieutenant A. H. Dobbs              Killed with Relief Force,
                                        Kut-al-Amarah, April 21st, 1916.

  Captain S. M. Bailie (87th          Wounded, Action on the Gurma Safeh,
    Punjabis)                           July 5th, 1915.

  Lieutenant R. D. E. Darell          Wounded, Nasiriyeh, July 24th, 1915.

  Lieutenant E. J. D. MacElwaine      Wounded, Nasiriyeh, July 24th, 1915.

  2/Lieutenant C. W. Spowart          Wounded, Battle of Ctesiphon,
                                        November 22nd, 1915.

  Captain G. van R. Reyne             Wounded, Siege of Kut-al-Amarah.

  Major H. G. Cotton, 99th Infantry   Accidentally wounded, Kut-al-Amarah,
    (attached)                          June 10th, 1916; died whilst
                                        prisoner-of-war, Baghdad, June,
                                        1916.

  Major J. J. D. Sillery (retired)    Killed in Gallipoli while serving
                                        with the Manchester Regt, 1915.

  Captain B. H. B. Magrath (resigned) Killed in France while serving with
                                        New Armies.

  Captain A. G. Dawson (exchanged)    Killed in France with Middlesex
                                        Regiment.




APPENDIX V.

GREAT WAR CASUALTIES.


                            BRITISH     INDIAN      INDIAN
                            OFFICERS.  OFFICERS.  OTHER RANKS.  FOLLOWERS
  Killed in action              5          5          89           2
  Died of wounds                2          —          32           1
  Died of disease               2          —          35           3
  Wounded                      10         13         542           7
  Died whilst prisoners of war  1          1          86          15




APPENDIX VI.

LIST OF COMMANDANTS, 1903-1926.


  Lieut.-Colonel J. Jackson, 16th Madras Infantry    1903-30/11/05

  Lieut.-Colonel T. McKay                            1/12/05-25/10/08

  Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Dewing                        26/10/08-1/10/12

  Lieut.-Colonel A. C. Hamilton Smithett             2/10/12-25/11/15
                                                       (died of wounds)

  Major H. C. Cotton, 99th Infantry, attached }      Temporarily during
  Major N. V. L. Rybot, D.S.O.                }        the Siege of Kut.
  Captain E. Milford                          }

  Lieut.-Colonel Rodney-Anderson, from 82nd Punjabis 26/11/15 (Never
                                                       joined: died in
                                                       India).

  Captain R. D. E. Darell (Acting)                   On reformation of the
                                                       Regiment on 1/1/17.

  Lieut.-Colonel W. L. Malcolm, from 31st Punjabis   1/3/17-31/1/18

  Lieut.-Colonel L. A. Watson, from 74th Punjabis    1/2/18-15/5/18

  Lieutenant-Colonel J. F. Woodham                   8/6/18-10/11/19

  Major S. van B. Laing, D.S.O., M.C. (acting)       11/11/19-31/3/21

  Lieut.-Colonel E. Milford, D.S.O.                  1/4/21-31/1/25

  Lieut.-Colonel A. F. Harper                        1/2/25
